---
title: Blog
author: craftamap
weight: 40
date: 2021-10-12
---

# Blog

## How I built a browser extension in 2021 (using modern tools and libraries)

Recently, I started working on my first browser extension for Firefox and
Chrome. With this blog post I want to share my experience building a web
extension with modern tools and frameworks in 2021. Therefore, this is not a
guide on how to build a browser extension, but rather contains some useful
information and tips I gathered while developing the extension.

###  the scope of my extension

The extension I created is called Owncast Browser Extension, which can be used
as a companion for owncast, a self-hosted twitch alternative. The scope is
simple:

1. Give the user a simple pop-up displaying a list of followed instances - the
   data is fetched from various REST apis.
2. Send the user notifications whenever a followed instance goes online.
3. Follow an instance by clicking a button when visiting a owncast page. This
   button needs to be inserted by the browser extension.

Let‚Äôs see what challenges I encountered while developing my extension.

### What‚Äôs up with this manifest.json?

The most important bit when building the browser extension is the `manifest.json`. The manifest contains the most important information about an extension, as well as the entry points used by the browser. A simple manifest may look like this:

```json
{
  "manifest_version": 2,
  "name": "Borderify",
  "version": "1.0",
  "description": "Adds a red border to all webpages matching mozilla.org.",
  "icons": {
    "48": "icons/border-48.png"
  },
  "content_scripts": [
    {
      "matches": ["*://*.mozilla.org/*"],
      "js": ["borderify.js"]
    }
  ]
}
```

*A simple manifest example*

However, writing the manifest is not as easy as you might think. First of all,
Firefox allows different keys and values than Chrome. Also, Chrome recently
introduced [Manifest
V3](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/extensions/mv3/intro/), a new version of
the manifest with new keys and features. However, as I want to support both
browsers, and Firefox does not support Manifest V3 completly, I decided to
stick with Manifest Version 2.

### using modern building tools 

Both
[Mozilla](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions)
and [Google](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/extensions/mv3/getstarted/)
offer documentation for building a browser extension. But while both pieces of
documentation offer an awesome start point for new developers, they miss out
providing much information on how to build an extension with modern build
tools. And nobody's to blame here - quite the contrary. Guides like this should
stay as unbiased as possible regarding your tooling stack.

However, as a developer who loves to work with webpack, this left me with some
open questions. Is it even possible to use webpack? What do I need to do?

Once I started digging into the process a bit, I found out that most things
actually do not change compared to a normal webpack project. Both Firefox and
Mozilla-Extensions are essentially just zip-files containing the manifest and
your compiled files, such as your `HTML`, `JS` and `CSS` files. This is similar
to a usual frontend-only app, where you just have your compiled files sitting
on a web-server. Usually, build tools will put those files into a `dist/` or
`build/` directory. So basically, we can just take our `dist/` directory,
bundle it into a zip, and we are done.

Luckily, Mozilla even provides a cool tool that makes bundling the add-on a bit
easier, called `web-ext`.

#### using `web-ext` for easier development with Firefox 

[web-ext](https://github.com/mozilla/web-ext) is a command line tool to help
build, lint and run firefox extensions. While `web-ext lint` checks the
validity of our manifest and all included files, `web-ext build` creates the
required zip-file containing all files.

Another useful feature is `web-ext run`, which starts a new firefox-profile
with the browser extension installed from the build-directory supporting
hot-reloading (for example with `webpack --watch`).

If you plan to develop a browser extension primarily for Firefox, I can highly
recommend using `web-ext`!


### üëΩ The browser API - some helpful tips

#### webextension-polyfill

When I started developing the extension, I started developing for Firefox. In
Firefox, you can use the native `browser`-API to interact, well, with the
browser: `browser.storage` let's you storage items, `browser.tabs` let's you
interact with tabs, `browser.runtime.sendMessage` let's you send messages in
your addon-context with a Promise-based API, etc. 

When first installing the extension in chrome, I was quite surprised when there
was no `browser`-object. Instead, the `chrome`-object existed with similar
functionalities, but working with a callback-based API.

This brings us into a annoying situation: Do we really want to duplicate the
code for Firefox and Chrome based on their APIs and Interfaces?

Luckily, Mozilla comes to the rescue with their
[webextension-polyfill](https://github.com/mozilla/webextension-polyfill)
library. This library allows you to use the Promise-based `browser`-API used in
Firefox in Chrome by importing it whenever used:

```javascript
import browser from 'webextension-polyfill';

browser.browserAction.onClicked.addListener(() => {
  browser.tabs.executeScript({file: "content.js"});
});
```

This makes it super easy to work cross-browser. But I also recommend using this
polyfill when just developing for Chrome, as the Promise-based API is much
easier to work with compared to the callback-based `chrome`-API.
 
####  Use sendMessage

When developing the first draft of the web extension, a major difficulty I
found was communicating between the background script and the pop-up. I started
out by using the `window`-object of the pop-up, which is accessible from both
endpoints, `background` and `pop-up`. But doing this felt really "hacky", and
just not right.

Luckily, I learned about `browser.runtime.sendMessage`, a [browser
API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API/runtime/sendMessage)
which allows two-way communication between two parts of the browser extension. 

Let's take a look at a quick example: We have two parts, `pop-up` and
`background`. Whenever `pop-up` starts, it wants to get some data which only
can be accessed from within `background`. A simple code example could look like
this:

```javascript
// code in pop-up 

// 1Ô∏è‚É£
browser.runtime.sendMessage({
    type: 'getData',
    payload: {...},
}).then((response) => {
    // 4Ô∏è‚É£
    // yourState could be Redux, Vuex or just a simple object 
    yourState.commit('actionName', response.data)
}).catch((reason) => {
    console.error(reason);
})
```

```javascript 
// code in background
browser.runtime.onMessage.addListener((message) => {
    if (message.type === 'getData') { 
        // 2Ô∏è‚É£
        return doAsyncBackgroundThings.toFetchData(message.payload)
            .then((data) => {
                // 3Ô∏è‚É£
                return {
                    status: 'success',
                    data: data
                }
            });
    }
})
```

If you are not familiar on how Promises work in JavaScript, don't worry. All
you need to know is that we can send a request from the pop-up to the
background, where the event listener in the background will get this request.
The object or Promise the background returns will be forwarded to the pop-up
again, and the circle is completed. You can take a look at the numbers in the
code to get a rough idea how the code will behave.

If you prefer a longer-lived connection because you want to send a lot of data,
there is also a way for "[Connection-based
messaging](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/Content_scripts#connection-based_messaging)".
`browser.runtime.connect` allows you to send messages on a lasting connection
(this is somehow comparable to a socket or port that stays open all the time).

Both `browser`-API-based approaches have their advantages and disadvantages,
but in my opinion both are superior compared to the old `window`-approach.

### Use your favourite frontend-stack

One thing I really liked about developing the first extension was the freedom
in terms of developing the "frontend" of the app. The majority of the frontend
of my extension is the pop-up.

![](/img/posts/2021/owncast-extension-popup.png)

As the pop-up is really just a simple webpage built with HTML, CSS and JS, you
can choose whatever technology you want to.

You are a `React`-Guy? No problem. You like working with `jquery`? Sure!
`tailwindcss` is your favourite way of styling? Go for it! The
w3c-specifications are the limit.

My first draft of the app was developed using
[VanillaJS](http://vanilla-js.com/) and Handlebars templates. However, this was
not really future-proof, and I refactored the extension using
[vuejs](https://vuejs.org/), [vuex](https://vuex.vuejs.org/), and
[tailwindcss](https://tailwindcss.com/).

This shows that there are unlimited options on how to code your browser
extension - just choose your favourite and start developing!

### Ready for the stage? How to publish your extension

So you developed your own first browser extension and you want to publish it so
that other people can find and install it. There are multiple ways to do it,
like offering the extension from your website or directly from GitHub by
self-signing your extension.

However, most people will probably search for browser extensions using the
official browser stores, [addons.mozilla.org](https://addons.mozilla.org) and
the [Chrome Web Store](https://chrome.google.com/webstore). My extension is
actually published on both of them, so let's talk about how it went!

In both stores, it's really easy to start uploading your extension - just grab
your `.zip`-directory, upload it and fill in some metadata and questions.

As I mainly developed for Firefox at first, I first published the extension in
the **Mozilla Addons** "Store". Here are some things I noticed while
publishing:

- It's free! No costs involved whatsoever.
- An extension has to go through an approval process:
  - The extension is not allowed to contain the word "Firefox"
  - In some cases, the whole source code needs to be submitted as well
  - The approval process can take a few hours to days (but it only took 5 hours
    for me)

In general I would describe the process at addons.mozilla.org as really easy.

My experience with the Chrome Web Store was a bit different, however:

- You are charged $5 once for getting a developer account (This is not the end
  of the world, but especially for small open source projects its kind of
  disappointing)
- The extension has to go through an approval process as well
  - However, you do not need to submit your source code
  - It takes about 7 - 10 days for the approval to get through

Overall, the waiting and paying made the Chrome experience a bit more annoying
than the Firefox side, but I guess this is just a minor difference. However,
the process was pretty straightforward on either platform.


### Conclusion

Writing a conclusion to this blog post is kinda wierd - what to say here? 

Maybe let's first talk about the experience I was able to get while writing my
own extension. This extension was the first "real" project I used VueJS and
Vuex in. Therefore, it really helped my develop my skills for those libraries.
But more importantly I learned some browser APIs, like the
`runtime.sendMessage` or the `runtime.storage` APIs, which are powerful
endpoints that I never used before, and the knowledge I gathered is also useful
outside the browser extension scope.

If you got interested in writing your own browser extension, I can highly
recommend checking out the [Extension Workshop](https://extensionworkshop.com/)
by Mozilla on how you can get stated developing your own first browser
extension, and see what's possible with them.

If you want to learn more about the browser extension I created and take a look
at the source code (or even want to contribute to it), check out the source
code on [GitHub](https://github.com/craftamap/owncast-browser-extension). 


Thanks for sticking until the end and reading this blog post. You want to chat
or contact me? Hit me up on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/craftamap)!
